This file was originally generated on 2018-08-31 and revised on 2024-10-23 by Marney Pratt


-------------------
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------


1. Title of Dataset 

Mill River Water Quality Data for 2018-2024


2. Author Information


  Principal Investigator Contact Information
        Name: Marney Pratt
           Institution: Smith College
           Address: 44 College Ln, Northampton, MA 01063
           Email: mcpratt@smith.edu



3. Date of data collection (single date, range, approximate date) <dates in format YYYY-MM-DD>

2018-06 to 2024-09


4. Geographic location of data collection (where was data collected?): 

Mill River in Northampton, MA  USA



5. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data:

Smith College Facilities Management funded summary salary for Marney Pratt and 
various Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships awarded to students

The Horner Fund also funded Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships to several students 

The Smith College Department of Biological Sciences funded some of the materials and supplies in 
addition to Smith College Facilities Management

--------------------------
SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
-------------------------- 


1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data:
No restrictions other than proper citation/attribution


2. Recommended citation for this metadata text file:

Pratt, MC.  2024.  Mill River water quality data metadata for 2018-2024.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.

7. Recommended citation for the data:

Pratt, MC.  2024.  Mill River water quality data for 2018-2024.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.



---------------------
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
---------------------


1. File List
   A. Filename: waterQ.csv       
      Short description:
Water quality data were measured for both locations (upstream and downstream riffle) in May/June & September/October 2018-2024


--------------------------
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------


1. Description of methods used for collection/generation of data: 

Measurements were taken upstream and downstream of Paradise Pond in Northampton, MA in 5 "microhabitat" locations in each area.  
More details are given below.


2. Methods for processing the data: 
See DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION below

3. People involved with sample collection, processing, analysis and/or submission:

Investigators included:
MP - Marney Pratt
DL - Denise Lello
Smith College Bio 131 and SURF students and other volunteers


-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: waterQ.csv
-----------------------------------------

Variable List
    
date: sampling date in year-month-day (yyyy-mm-dd) format
  dates are all given in year-month-day (yyyy-mm-dd) format (but note that 
	sometimes Excel will change the date to month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format 
	if you open and save the .csv file with Excel)

year: year in which the sampling took place

season: season in which the sampling took place 
  
    Summer = late May - early June (this is probably more accurately described 
    as late spring or early summer for this location)
    Fall = mid September - early October

location: location in the river - Upstream or Downstream of Paradise Pond
	Coordinates estimated with Google Earth.
	https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing

	Upstream = This site is located in the Mill River upstream of the Paradise 
	Pond impoundment.  The trail used to get to the river is 	Just off of 
	Federal St in Northampton, MA.  The coordinates for the center of the area of 
	the river sampled that is: 
		UR "downstream of the bend" 42degrees19'09"N  72degrees39'17"W  226m in elevation 
		UR "upstream of the bend"   42degrees19'17"N  72degrees39'12"W  226m in elevation
		Note that the "bend"" is the bend in the river where there is a high 
		retaining wall on one side and the water runs fast and deep

	Downstream = This site is located just downstream of the Paradise Pond Dam and 
	Lamont Bridge in the Mill River.  
	The center of the area of the river sampled in is around:  
	42degrees18'53"N  72degrees38'27"W  150m in elevation
	
	Both sites were fast flowing, relatively shallow, riffles with mostly rocky 
	substrate mixed with more or less sand
	The upstream site is fairly sandy "downstream of the bend" but we tried to 
	sample in the rockier areas

sampleID: unique identification code for each sample.
	example: 01URSU18.UM - first two numbers are the sample number, 
	the next two letters are for the site (UR = upstream riffle, DR = downstream riffle), 
	the next two letters are for the season (SU = summer, FA = Fall), 
	and the last two numbers are for the year (18 = 2018, 19 = 2019).  
	The letters after the period indicate the microhabitat or NA if the 
	microhabitat is unknown

	
	See the map of each habitat for locations including the microhabitats within 
	the sampling area where samples were taken. 		
	https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing


sampleID.prefix: unique identification code for each sample day. 
  Makes the sampleID when microhabitat is added.  

sampling: what type of sampling occurred on a particular day

	macros: a sample of macroinvertebrates was taken on the same day.  
	
	water: no macroinvertebrate sample was taken on the same day.  
	During these sampling days, both the upstream and downstream locations were 
	sampled on the same day so that overall weather conditions could be better 
	controlled for.

sky: weather description for the day (sunny, cloudy, rainy, etc)

startTime
	Description: the time a measurement was taken using a 24-hour clock in the 
	Eastern Daylight Timezone
	
dateTime.UTC: the date and time in year-month-day hours:minutes:seconds 
  in the Universal Time Coordinated (UTC) time zone that sampling was started


microhabitat: there were 5 microhabitats sampled within each location 
  (upstream or downstream) as follows
	
	DSR - Downstream slow rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the 
	athletic fields), just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is 
	slower and there are some large rocks)
	DSP - Downstream sponge area (in the middle of the river, shallow, fast flow, 
	lots of sponges present)
	DFR - Downstream fast rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the 
	athletic fields), just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster 
	and there are some large rocks)
	DM - Downstream middle (in the middle of the river, moderate flow, just 
	downstream of the sponge area, lots of small and medium sized rocks)
	DSH - Downstream shady (on the far side of the river (closer to the 
	athletic fields), in a very fast flow area and very shaded because right below a 
	tree, further upstream than DFR)

	USR - Upstream slow rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path 
	and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), 
	just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is slower and there are 
	some large rocks)
	UFR - Upstream fast rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path 
	and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), just upstream 
	of some larger rocks where the flow is faster and there are some large rocks)
	UM - Upstream middle (in the middle of the river near some larger rocks, 
	moderate flow, "downstream of the bend", lots of smallsized rocks)
	USH - Upstream shady (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", 
	further from the path we come in on), in a fast flow area and shaded 
	because right below a tree)
	USU - Upstream sunny (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", 
	further from the path we come in on), in a realtively fast flow area 
	just downstream of USH that is sunnier         


quadrat: sample number within a microhabitat on a particular day.  
  1-3 samples were made in each microhabitat per day

lat: Latitude coordinate 
  measured by Vernier's LabQuest 2 
  (uses WGS84, accruacy: half of data points fall within a radius of 2m)
	https://www.vernier.com/products/interfaces/labq2/

long: Longitude coordinate 
  measured by Vernier's LabQuest 2 
  (uses WGS84, accruacy: half of data points fall within a radius of 2m)
	https://www.vernier.com/products/interfaces/labq2/

alt: Altitude in meters
  measured by Vernier's LabQuest 2 
  (uses WGS84, accruacy: half of data points fall within a radius of 2m) 
  (note that altitude is no longer recorded because it isn't very accurate or 
  useful in this case)
	https://www.vernier.com/products/interfaces/labq2/

depth: depth of the water in centimeters taken in the center of the quadrat
  measured with a meter stick with millimeter marking

pH: the pH 
	pH was measured using an Oakton pH Testr 50 Waterproof Pocket pH Tester 
	(accuracy: ±0.01 pH). Effort was made to wait until the meter 
	stabilized on a reading before the pH was recorded
	
	pH was calibrated ahead of time using buffers made using the Vernier pH 
	capsule set.	

wTemp: Water temperature was measured in Celcius by different tools depending on year

	2018-2019 we used the Vernier Stainless Steel Temperature Probe 
	(accuracy: ±0.2°C at 0°C, ±0.5°C at 100°C) . 
	https://www.vernier.com/manuals/tmp-bta/
	
	Starting in 2020, we used the Oakton pH Testr 50 Waterproof Pocket pH Tester 
	(accuracy: ±0.2°C) to minimize the number of different tools to bring in the field


	In all cases, the reading taken just below the surface once the reading 
	seemed to stabilize. 


DO: Dissolved oxygen was measured in milligrams of oxygen per liter by the 
  Vernier Optical Dissolved Oxygen Probe (accurate to ± 0.1 mg/L). 
	https://www.vernier.com/manuals/odo-bta/
	
	The reading taken just below the surface (with the probe all the way in the 
	water at least up to the temperature sensor) and was a 10 second average. 
	Effort was made to make sure that the probe had settled on a reading before 
	it was recorded (it can take a little while for the first reading or two to 
	settle as the temperature adjusts)
	
	The probe was calibrated using a 100% saturation value determined by placing 
	the probe in the storage cap with distilled water saturating the sponge 
	(so the air was 100% saturated with water)
	

light: The photosyntehtically active radiation was measured in photosynthetic 
  photon flux density (PPFD) which corresponds to the micromoles of photons 
  per meter squared per second
	https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/par-bta.pdf
	
	The sensor was mounted on a PVC pipe with one section that was bent to be 
	parallel to the bottom of the river.  
	The sensor faced upstream (with the cord facing downstream)
	and care was taken to not let our shaddows interfere with the sensor.
	The reading taken was a 10 second average. 
	
	PAR range 0 to 2000 umol m-2 s-1 (in full sun)
	Absolute accuracy ±5% (full scale)
	Repeatability ±1%
	Long-term drift Less than 2% per year
	Cosine response
		 45º ±2%
 		75º ±5%
	Spectral range 410–655 nm
	Resolution 1 umol m-2 s-1
	Operating environment –40 to 70˚ C
		0–100% relative humidity
	Sensor head and cable can be submerged in water to electronics box.
	Stored calibration values
		slope 500 umol m-2 s-1/ V
		intercept 0 


flow: the flow rate of the water in meters per second
	flow rate was measured in meters per second by the Vernier Flow Rate Sensor 
	(without any spacer on the bottom) (accurate to 0.04 m/s, resolution of 0.0012 m/s). 	
	https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/flo-bta.pdf
	Note that this sensor does not measure really low flows well, there were times 
	when the water could be seen to be moving very slowly but the propeller did 
	not spin at all.
	Flow measurement was taken by facing the propeller upstream and taking a 
	10 second average.
	The flow rate sensor was zeroed before measurements began.
  
  
turb: Turbidity was measured in Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) by the 
  Vernier Turbidity Sensor (accurate to ±2 NTU for readings under 25 NTU). 	
  https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/trb-bta.pdf
	Samples of water from each location were taken with a clean turbidity bottle 
	(https://www.vernier.com/products/accessories/trb-bot/)
	Calibration was done using Millipore filtered RO water and the 100 NTU 
	calibration bottle that came with the sensor.  
	All bottles were tipped upside down three times before a measurement was taken 
	or calibration was performed
	Bottles were wiped clean by a Kim Wipe before the bottle was placed in the sensor.
	
	
cond: Conductivity was measured in µS/cm by the Vernier Conductivity Probe 
  (accurate to ±2% of full-scale). https://www.vernier.com/manuals/con-bta/
  
  A sample of water was taken from each microhabitat and measured in lab that 
  afternoon (right after sampling) or the next morning
  
	The conductivity probe was calibrated with Millipore filtered RO water and 
	conductivity standard solution (low) of 150 µ S/cm. 
	https://www.vernier.com/products/accessories/con-lst/

	Low range: 0 to 200 µS/cm (0 to 100 mg/L TDS)
	Mid range: 0 to 2000 µS/cm (0 to 1000 mg/L TDS)
	High range: 0 to 20,000 µS/cm (0 to 10,000 mg/L TDS)

nitrate: the concentration of Nitrate (NO3–) in mg/L (=ppm) in the water as 
  measured by the Vernier Nitrate Ion-Selective Electrode
  (accurate to ±10% of full scale (calibrated 1 to 100 mg/L)). 
  https://www.vernier.com/product/nitrate-ion-selective-electrode/
  
  A sample of water was taken from each microhabitat and measured in lab that 
  afternoon (right after sampling) or the next morning
  
  The Nitrate Ion-Selective Electrode was calibrated with a low (1 mg/L) and 
  high (100 mg/L) Nitrate standard that were each purchased from Vernier 
  (catalog codes NO3-LST and NO3_HST respectively).

  These measurements were begun in Summer 2022 (we did not have the equipment to
  measure it before then)

alkalinity: the total alkalinity of a water sample in ppm of CaCO3

  Starting in Fall 2022, alkalinity was measured using the Hanna Instruments 
  Freshwater Alkalinity Checker (order code: HI775, 
  https://www.hannainst.com/hi775-alkalinity-freshwater.html). 
  This colorimeter has a resolution of 1 ppm and and accuracy of ±5 ppm or ±5% 
  of reading. The instrument displays the alkalinity concentration in ppm of CaCO3. 
  Alkalinity conversion: 1 ppm CaCO3 = 0.02 meq/L = 0.056 dkH
  
  A sample of water was taken from each microhabitat and measured in lab that 
  afternoon (right after sampling) or the next morning

phosphate: the phosphate (PO4) level of a water sample in ppm of (PO4)3- 

  In Fall 2022, phosphate was measured using the Hanna Instruments 
  High Range Phosphate Colorimeter Checker 
  (order code: HI717, https://www.hannainst.com/hi717-phosphate-hr.html). 
  This instrument has a resolution of 0.1 ppm, a range of 0-30ppm, and an 
  accuracy of ±1.0 ppm or ±5% of reading.
  
  The values were lower than anticipated, so in Summer 2023 we switched to using
  the Hanna Instruments Low Range Phosphate Colorimeter Checker 
  (order code: HI713, https://www.hannainst.com/hi713-phosphate-lr.html). 
  This instrument has a resolution of 0.01 ppm, a range of 0-2.50ppm, and an 
  accuracy of ±0.04 ppm or ±4% of reading.

  A sample of water was taken from each microhabitat and measured in lab that 
  afternoon (right after sampling) or the next morning

notes: notes from sampling

